---
layout: post
title: on power
date: 2016-09-16
categories: prose
---

I was accosted by a man on Market Street today.   

He was an Indian man with a heavy accent and a business suit, and I was riding down Market Street in the morning bustle. There is no standalone bike lane on that end of Market Street. It's all humans and cars, grates and white lines, a few lights that always seem to be red and that everyone disregards.   

I see my goal - or do I? Is this the street, or the next? I'm aware of the movement around me, the colors and smells and sounds. I no longer pay attention to the lights and instead, more demanding, the unfolding living maze by which I might reach my destination.  

A body crosses my path, so I wait, waving him forward. Dark suit, the presence is distinctly male, and when he fails to pass, I look up - he's angry. I apologize for startling him and wave him along. But he stands, waiting, intimidating, scowling, inviting me to back down, bow down and cower. The walk sign is running out, and he still doesn't move. I have the fleeting thought that if this were India and I an Indian woman, I would be hit or worse.  

But this is America, and I am a white woman in San Francisco, and hitting comes with consequences. So when he shuffles to block my escaping front tire, that's the catch I throw in his face.  

_What are you going to do?? Hit me?_

His end game clarified for him in this moment - the impotence of this display. He turned away fuming, and I rode on before he changed his mind.  

My immediate reaction was a high. I felt empowered. I had won, hadn't I? I had yelled back, challenged him. But his daring to confront me had revealed something more, something sinister. He dared to stop, dared to yell at this stranger - to attempt to break me down where I stood, in deference to his arguably average morning irritability.  

I was able to challenge him verbally only because, had he fought back physically, I would have been protected by law. As such, my protection lied exclusively on my position as a privileged white woman living in San Francisco, USA.  

So while my first reaction was one of empowerment - hadn't I stood my ground? - as the minutes went by, a sense of disease set in.  

My first compulsion was to share my experience, so I wrote a small blurb for Twitter:  

_Angry man yelled at me on #marketstreet, and I unabashedly defended myself. Feeling #empowered._  

But that didn't feel quite right. I edited:  

_Angry man ~~yelled~~ screamed at me on #marketstreet, and I unabashedly defended myself. Feeling #empowered._  

Still no. I published anyway. Then I remembered that my employer was currently executing a background check. I deleted the Tweet. What would happen if they found out I had yelled back at a man on Market Street? Would I be labeled an unhireable _angry woman_? Would I ultimately be found in the wrong, since my tire crept an inch into the pedestrian walkway during our confrontation, and this could be easily construed as _"that crazy woman nearly ran me over"_? Could this man prosecute if he learned my name, and win?  

In that moment, the weight of my powerlessness washed over me in a wave. Those initial feelings of elation swept away, leaving nothing but frustration and anger. I considered the disadvantage I would have in court against this presumably wealthier-than-me older businessman. I cringed at the cards I would have to play if it came to that: I was frightened, I would say. I was small, meek, and physically threatened. _I was a woman_, I would say, in the weakest, most contemptible meaning of the word.  

And in the end, no matter the verdict, I would lose. I had toed into a system that had already discredited me before I rolled a fraction of my tire into that pedestrian walkway.  

He had won.
